>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, JANUARY 24:
UP AND DOWN THE EAST COAST--
DIGGING OUT FROM THIS WEEKEND'S
DEADLY BLIZZARD.
THE POLITICAL AND LEGAL ISSUES
SURROUNDING THE PRESIDENT'S PLAN
TO CLOSE THE PRISON AT
GUANTANAMO BAY.
AND A NEW STUDY REVEALS THE
EFFECTS OF PRESERVING ANIMAL
HABITATS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
THIS WEEKEND'S MASSIVE WINTER
STORM SET RECORDS ALONG THE EAST
COAST, BURYING SOME PLACES IN AS
MUCH AS THREE FEET OF SNOW BY
THIS MORNING.
THE STORM IS GONE NOW, AND TODAY
EMERGENCY CREWS WERE WORKING TO
BRING SOME NORMALCY TO THE 80
MILLION PEOPLE AFFECTED.
OFFICIALS WARN THE WORK IS FAR
FROM OVER.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: SNOWFALL RECORDS IN
PARTS SOME PLACES IN
PENNSYLVANIA, BALTIMORE, AND
WEST VIRGINIA.
MORE THAN 11,000 FLIGHTS HAVE
BEEN CANCELED BETWEEN FRIDAY AND
TOMORROW AND TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF HOMES AND BUSINESSES WERE
STILL WITHOUT POWER TODAY, MORE
THAN 20,000 IN NEW JERSEY, WHICH
IS STILL REELING FROM COASTAL
FLOODING.
>> THE WINDS ARE HORRIBLE, IT'S
CUTTING YOU UP THE SAND AND THE
RAIN.
>> WE SURVIVED AND THEN SOME.
>> Reporter: YET OFFICIALS ALONG
THE EAST COAST SAY THE WORST OF
THE STORM IS OVER.
MOST PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION IS
BACK TO NORMAL AND TRAVEL BANS
HAVE BEEN LIFTED IN PLACES LIKE
NEW YORK CITY, WHICH EXPERIENCED
THE SECOND LARGEST SNOWFALL IN
ITS RECORDED HISTORY-- MORE THAN
TWO FEET.
>> THE TRAVEL BAN HAS BEEN
LIFTED, THAT DOES NOT MEAN
PEOPLE SHOULD GO OUT AND TAKE A
RIDE AND SEE THE SIGHTS.
>> Reporter: MOTORISTS AND
PEDESTRIANS BEING URGED TO STAY
OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS SO THAT
EMERGENCY CREWS CAN GET TO WORK.
ACCIDENTS ON ICY ROADS ARE BEING
BLAMED FOR MOST OF THE AT LEAST
25 STORM-RELATED DEATHS SINCE
THURSDAY.
>> WE HAVEN'T HAD ANY FOOD SINCE
YESTERDAY.
>> Reporter: 500 VEHICLES WERE
STILL STUCK ON THE PENNSYLVANIA
TURNPIKE THIS MORNING, SOME
WAITING FOR MORE THAN 30 HOURS
FOR THE NATIONAL GUARD AND LOCAL
RESCUE WORKERS TO DIG THEM OUT
AND GET THEM MOVING.
SOME TRAVELERS TRIED TO MAKE THE
BEST OF IT, STEPPING OUT INTO
THE COLD AND HOLDING AN
IMPROMPTU SUNDAY CATHOLIC MASS.
IN THE NATION'S CAPITAL, MASS
TRANSIT WAS STILL SHUT DOWN ON
SUNDAY AND SCHOOLS WILL BE
CLOSED TOMORROW.
THE U.S. HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES CANCELED ALL
VOTES FOR THE UPCOMING WEEK.
>> Thompson: THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" REPORTED YESTERDAY THAT
FORMER NEW YORK CITY MAYOR
MICHAEL BLOOMBERG IS CONSIDERING
A PRESIDENTIAL RUN AS AN
INDEPENDENT.
THE BILLIONAIRE BUSINESSMAN IS
SAID TO HAVE TOLD CLOSE FRIENDS
THAT HE WOULD LIKELY ENTER THE
RACE IF DONALD TRUMP OR SENATOR
TED CRUZ AND SENATOR BERNIE
SANDERS WON THE NOMINATIONS OF
THEIR RESPECTIVE PARTIES.
SOME OF THE CURRENT CROP OF
CANDIDATES TOOK TO THE SUNDAY
MORNING NEWS SHOWS TODAY TO
VOICE THEIR REACTIONS.
>> THE WAY I READ WHAT HE SAID
IS IF I DIDN'T GET THE
NOMINATION, HE MIGHT CONSIDER
IT.
WELL, I'M GONNA RELIEVE HIM OF
THAT AND GET THE NOMINATION SO
HE DOESN'T HAVE TO.
>> HE'S VERY OPPOSITE WITH ME ON
GUNS AND HE'S OPPOSITE ON PRO-
LIFE AND HE'S OPPOSITE ON A LOT
OF THINGS.
SO, I WOULD LOVE TO HAVE MICHAEL
GET IN THE RACE, BUT I DON'T
KNOW IF HE'S GOING TO DO IT, BUT
I HOPE HE DOES.
I WOULD LOVE TO COMPETE AGAINST
MICHAEL.
>> IF DONALD TRUMP WINS AND MR.
BLOOMBERG GETS IN, YOU'RE GOING
TO HAVE TWO MULTI-BILLIONAIRES
RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES AGAINST ME.
AND I THINK THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
DO NOT WANT TO SEE OUR NATION
MOVE TOWARD AN OLIGARCHY WHERE
BILLIONAIRES CONTROL THE
POLITICAL PROCESS.
I THINK WE'LL WIN THAT ELECTION.
>> Thompson: THE TIMES REPORTS
THAT BLOOMBERG HAS SET A
DEADLINE OF EARLY MARCH FOR
MAKING HIS FINAL DECISION ON
WHETHER TO LAUNCH A CAMPAIGN.
>> Thompson: DURING HIS FIRST
WEEK IN OFFICE, PRESIDENT OBAMA
SIGNED AN EXECUTIVE ORDER TO
CLOSE THE PRISON AT THE U.S.
NAVAL BASE AT GUANTANAMO BAY,
CUBA, WITHIN ONE YEAR.
THAT ORDER WAS ISSUED SEVEN
YEARS AGO THIS PAST FRIDAY.
IN HIS STATE OF THE UNION
ADDRESS EARLIER THIS MONTH, THE
PRESIDENT SAID HE'LL KEEP
WORKING TO CLOSE THE PRISON,
BECAUSE, IN HIS WORDS, IT'S
EXPENSIVE, UNNECESSARY, AND
SERVES AS A RECRUITMENT TOOL FOR
AMERICA'S ENEMIES.
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH OPENED
GUANTANAMO IN 2002 TO HOLD
FOREIGN FIGHTERS CAPTURED
OVERSEAS, MAINLY IN AFGHANISTAN,
IN THE WAR ON TERROR THAT BEGAN
ON 9/11.
FOR THE PAST 14 YEARS, "MIAMI
HERALD" REPORTER CAROL ROSENBERG
HAS COVERED GUANTANAMO FULL
TIME, SPENDING MORE THAN A
THOUSAND DAYS ON SITE.
SHE SAT DOWN YESTERDAY WITH THE
NEWSHOUR'S HARI SREENIVASAN TO
DISCUSS THE LEGAL AND LOGISTICAL
OBSTACLES TO PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
GOAL.
>> THERE WERE AT ONE POINT 780
MEN THERE, NOW WE HAVE LESS THAN
A HUNDRED, I THINK 91 OR SO AS
WE TALK, AND THAT MIGHT CHANGE.
BUT WHY ARE PEOPLE STILL THERE?
>> PEOPLE ARE STILL AT
GUANTANAMO BECAUSE DESPITE
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S DESIRE TO
CLOSE IT, CONGRESS WON'T LET HIM
AM CONGRESS HAS DECIDED THAT
GUANTANAMO SHOULD CONTINUE TO
EXIST.
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS LIKE
GUANTANAMO.
AND THEY HAVE SYSTEMICALLY
THWARTED HIS EFFORTS TO CLOSE
THAT DETENTION CENTER IN CUBA.
CLOSING GUANTANAMO AT THIS STAGE
AND THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
VIEW IS REALLY MOVING GUANTANAMO
TO U.S. SOIL.
THE IDEA IS NOT TO OPEN THE
CAGES AND LET EVERYBODY GO OR
GIVE THEM FEDERAL TRIALS AND PUT
THEM IN FEDERAL DETENTION.
THE IDEA IS TO PICK UP THE LAST
DETAINEES AND MOVE THEM TO
MILITARY DETENTION IN THE UNITED
STATES.
WHAT WE CALL GUANTANAMO NORTH.
CLOSING THE DETENTION CENTER IN
CUBA AND RECONSTITUTING ON U.S.
SOIL.
CONGRESS SO FAR HAS SYSTEMICALLY
BLOCKED THAT VISION.
>> WHY?
>> I THINK THAT PART OF IT IS
THAT THERE IS FEAR THAT FOR SOME
REASON THESE ALLEGED TERRORISTS
ARE SCARIER THAN ALL OF THE
ALLEGED TERRORISTS-- OR ACTUALLY
THE CONVICTED TERRORISTS IN U.S.
PRISONS.
I THINK PART OF IS THAT MEMBERS
OF CONGRESS REALLY LIKE THE
MESSAGE OF GUANTANAMO.
AND THE MESSAGE OF GUANTANAMO TO
THE WORLD IS MESS WITH US AND
YOU END UP IN A CAGE AT
GUANTANAMO BAY.
IN ADDITION, THERE IS AMBITION
BY SOME PEOPLE IN CONGRESS TO
GROW GUANTANAMO.
THEY LIKE THE IDEA THAT THIS
COULD BE AN INTERROGATION
CENTER.
AND MOSTLY NOBODY WANTS
GUANTANAMO IN THEIR BACKYARD.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAVE THE
OUTCOMES BEEN?
YOU MADE AN INTERESTING
DISTINCTION.
YOU SAID THE PEOPLE THAT HAVE
BEEN FEDERALLY CONVICTED IN THE
UNITED STATES OF ACTS OF TERROR
VERSUS WHAT HAS HAPPENED TO
THESE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN THERE
POSSIBLY AS LONG AS 14 YEARS.
>> SO WITH THE MOST RAREST OF
EXCEPTION, THESE ARE NOT
CONVICTS.
THEY'RE NOT CRIMINALS.
THEY'RE WAR PRISONERS.
THEY WOULD BE IN A MORE
TRADITIONAL WAR, WHAT WE WOULD
CONSIDER TO BE A PO-W, SOMEONE
WHO IS CONSIDERED THE ENEMY,
TAKEN OFF OF THE BATTLE FIELD
AND HELD UNTIL THE END OF THAT
WAR.
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION NEVER
CONFERRED ON AL-QAEDA, POW
STATUS.
THEY CREATED THIS WAR PRISONER
WITH A FEW EXCEPTIONS OF THE 91
MEN DOWN THERE TODAY, TEN ARE IN
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS.
THE IDEA IS JUST TO HOLD THEM.
AND TO SYSTEMICALLY DECIDE WHEN
THEY CAN GO.
YOU KNOW, PEOPLE DON'T REALLY
UNDERSTAND THAT THEY'RE NOT ALL
TERRORISTS IN THE CLASSIC
UNDERSTANDING OF IT.
THEY'RE FOOT SOLDIERS.
THEY ARE PEOPLE WHO WERE PICKED
UP BY THE NORTHERN ALLIANCE IN
AND AROUND MAZAR IRSHARIF IN
AFGHANISTAN AND ULTIMATELY
HANDED OVER TO THE U.S.
THE U.S. TROOPS DIDN'T MARCH
INTO AFGHANISTAN AND TAKE
PRISONERS.
PEOPLE GAVE THE AMERICANS THESE
AND IN SOME INSTANCES IN GITMO,
THESE PEOPLE WEREN'T IN
AFGHANISTAN AT ALL.
THEY WERE SOME PEOPLE PICK UPPED
UP IN THAILAND, MANY IN
PAKISTAN.
THIS IS NOT A BATTLE FIELD
ROUNDUP OF PRISONERS OF WAR.
BUT THEY ARE WAR PRISONERS.
THEY ARE NOT ACCUSED, WITH SOME
EXCEPTIONS, OF BEING CRIMINALS.
THAT IS VERY DIFFERENT THAN
TERRORISTS CONVICTED AND SITTING
IN FEDERAL DETENTION HERE.
THAT IS WHY THE IDEA IS TO BRING
THEM TO THIS COUNTRY FOR
MILITARY DETENTION, NOT FEDERAL
LOCKUP.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME OF THEM
HAVE ALSO BEEN CLEARED FOR
RELEASE BUT THEY'RE STILL THERE.
AND WE'VE HEARD IN THE PAST FEW
MONTHS, WE'VE SEEN ONE COUNTRY
TAKES A COUPLE HERE AND A FEW
THERE AND AT SOME POINT THERE
WERE 15 THAT WENT IN ONE
DIRECTION.
BUT THESE ARE PEOPLE THAT HAVE
BEEN CLEARED MAYBE FIVE OR SIX
YEARS AGO TO BE RELEASED.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
26 COUNTRIES HAVE TAKEN IN
PEOPLE WHO COULDN'T GO HOME.
AND THAT'S WHAT YOU HAVE BEEN
HEARING ABOUT LATELY IS RECENTLY
TWO MEN WERE SENT TO THE BALANCE
CANS.
THE VAST MAJORITY OF THOSE WE
WOULDN'T SEND BACK WERE FROM
YEMEN.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION AND THE
BUSH ADMINISTRATION BEFORE THEM
MADE A POLICY DECISION THAT
YEMENI DETAINEES AT GUANTANAMO
WOULD NOT GO HOME.
THEY FEARED THAT THEY WOULD BE
ENTERING THIS DESTABILIZED
COUNTRY WITH A POWERFUL AL-QAEDA
FRANCHISE AND THAT THERE WOULD
BE WHAT THEY CALL REENGAGEMENT
THAT THEY WOULDN'T GO BACK TO
NORMAL LIVES AND SETTLE DOWN, IS
THE HOPE.
THAT THEY WOULDN'T GO AND HAVE
FAMILIES AND GET ON WITH THEIR
LIVES.
THAT IN YEMEN THE ODDS WERE THEY
WOULD BE DRAWN BACK TO AL-QAEDA
AND ATTRACTING AMERICAN TARGETS.
>> Sreenivasan: TELL ME ABOUT
MOHAMMED WAZIR.
>> HE KNEW WHERE HE WAS GOING.
WE DON'T KNOW WHERE HE WAS
GOING.
HE WAS OFFERED SANCTUARY IN A
THIRD COUNTRY THAT HIS LAWYER
THOUGHT WAS A GREAT COUNTRY FOR
RESETTLEMENT, THAT WAS A GREAT
CHANCE FOR HIM.
BUT HE SAID MOHAMMED WAZIR IS
AFRAID.
HE HAS BEEN THERE SO LONG HE
FEARS THE UNKNOWN.
AND HE HAD BEEN INSISTING THAT
HE ONLY WANTED TO GO TO A
COUNTRY WHERE HIS MOM WAS, HIS
BROTHERS WERE OR HIS AUNTS AND
UNCLES WERE.
AND THAT'S THE U.A.A.,
INDONESIA, AND SAUDI ARABIA.
AND THE COUNTRY THAT AGREED TO
TAKE HIM IN ONE NONE OF THOSE.
AND HE COULDN'T BRING HIMSELF TO
GET ON A PLANE AND START HIS NEW
LIFE SOMEWHERE ELSE.
IT HAS HAPPENED BEFORE.
BUT THIS IS SUCH A STRANGE THING
BECAUSE WE HAVE BEEN HEARING
FROM THE LAWYER THAT THE
YEMENIS IN PARTICULAR WILL GO
ANYWHERE, THEY ARE SO DESPERATE
TO GET OFF GUANTANAMO THEY WILL
GO ANYWHERE.
THIS MAN WOULDN'T GET ON A
PLANE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THEIR
LIFE LIKE AFTER THEY GO
SOMEWHERE.
CAN'T THEY JUST DECIDE TO LEAVE
THOSE COUNTRIES AND TRY TO MAKE
THEIR WAY BACK TO WHEREVER THEIR
HOME IS.
>> THE DEAL THAT THE U.S. MAKES
IS A DIPLOMATIC ARRANGEMENT.
AND THEY ARE NOT EXACTLY PUBLIC.
BUT WE KNOW THAT THEY ARE NOT
ENTITLED TO TRAVEL PAPERS, AT
LEAST FOR A YEAR.
IN SOME INSTANCES FOR TWO YEARS.
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO GO TO A
REHABILITATION CENTRE, SOMETHING
THAT'S GOING TO GET THEM BACK
INTO SOCIETY.
A NEW SOCIETY, IN SOME
INSTANCES, YOU KNOW, THEY GIVE
THEM A NEW LANGUAGE.
THERE ARE SOME IN URUGUAY,
THAT JUST ARRIVED IN OMAN.
THERE ARE SOME
CHINESE-- CITIZENS OF CHINA
MUSLIM LEADERS WHO WERE SENT TO
PALAU.
THEY ARE ALL OVER THE WORLD AND
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES OFFER
DIFFERENT PACKAGES.
BUT NO, THE DESIGN OF THIS
PROGRAM IS FOR THEM NOT TO BE
ABLE TO JUMP ON THE FIRST PLANE
AND GO TO YEMEN.
>> Sreenivasan: PART OF THE
REASON YOU GO DOWN SO REGULARLY
IS TO COVER THE TRIAL.
ONE OF THEM IS THE 9/11 TRIAL
THAT IS STILL GOING.
>> THERE ARE HEARINGS, PRETRIAL
HEARINGS.
THEY ARE STILL TRYING TO
ESTABLISH HOW THERE WILL BE A
TRIAL OF FIVE MEN WHO WERE
CAPTURED IN 2002 AND 2003 AND
TAKEN OFF TO THE BLACK-- OF THE
CIA, WHERE THEY WERE NOT GIVEN
ACCESS TO THE RED CROSS, WHERE
THEY WERE SUBJECTED TO WHAT IS
NOW CONSIDERED TO BE TORTURE.
AND THEN DROPPED AT GUANTANAMO
IN 2006 FOR TRIAL.
THIS WAR COURT THAT WAS CREATED
FOR THOSE CIRCUMSTANCES AFTER
9/11 IS STILL TRYING TO WORK ON
HOW IT WILL HOLD THAT TRIAL.
THEY'RE STILL TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT WHAT CONSTITUTES LEGITIMATE
EVIDENCE.
IT SAY DEATH PENALTY TRIAL.
AND SO THEY HAVE LEARNED
COUNSEL, CIVILIAN DEFENSE
ATTORNEYS PAID FOR BY THE
PENTAGON TO PROVIDE THEM WITH
THE MOST ROBUST DEATH PENALTY
DEFENSES.
AND THOSE LAWYERS ARE DOING
EVERYTHING THEY CAN TO ATTACK
THE INTEGRITY OF THIS COURT THAT
WAS CREATED AFTER 9/11 BY GEORGE
BUSH.
AND THEN REFORMED BY BARACK
OBAMA.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
CAROL ROSENBERG, THANKS SO MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Thompson: AROUND THE WORLD,
THERE ARE PROTECTED AREAS FOR
ANIMALS IN DANGER.
FOR NEARLY A DECADE, RESEARCHERS
USED MOTION-TRIGGERED CAMERAS IN
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA,
AFRICA, AND SOUTHEAST ASIA TO
CAPTURE MILLIONS OF PHOTOS OF
ANIMALS IN SOME OF THESE
PROTECTED AREAS.
THOSE RESEARCHERS FROM THE
TROPICAL ECOLOGY ASSESSMENT AND
MONITORING NETWORK HAVE SIFTED
THROUGH ALL THOSE PICTURES --
AND THEY SEEM TO SHOW THAT
EFFORTS TO PRESERVE HABITATS
WORLDWIDE MAY BE PAYING OFF.
THE LEAD AUTHOR OF THAT STUDY,
LYDIA BEAUDROT SPOKE TO THE
NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE.
>> LYDIA, TELL ME A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHAT YOU EXPECTED FROM
THIS STUDY AND WHAT YOU ACTUALLY
DISCOVERED.
>> WILL WELL, WE KNOW THAT
GLOBALLY THERE ARE MASSIVE
DECLINES IN BIODIVERSITY AND
DISTINCTION RATES ARE ABOUT A
THOUSAND TIMES WHAT THEY WOULD
BE RIGHT NOW IF THERE WEREN'T
HUMAN ACTIVITY.
AND SO WE WERE EXPECTING IN THIS
FIRST ASSESSMENT WITH THIS
PANTROPICAL CAMERA SHOT NETWORK
THAT WE WOULD SEE THOSE
LARGE-SCALE DECLINES.
BUT WE'RE LOOKING WITHIN
PROTECTED AREAS AND WE'RE REALLY
SURPRISED TO FIND THAT ACTUALLY
THESE PROTECTED AREAS, AT LEAST
FOR NOW, SEEM TO BE DOING A GOOD
JOB OF MAINTAINING STABLE
COMMUNITIES OF TROPICAL MAMMALS
AND BIRDS.
>> Reporter: AND HOW IS IT
THAT YOU WERE ABLE TO GATHER ALL
OF THESE PHOTOGRAPHS?
EXPLAIN A LITTLE ABOUT THE
LOGISTICS.
>> THE INFRASTRUCTURE THAT THE
TROPICAL ECOLOGY ASSESSMENT AND
MONITORING NETWORK HAS PUT IN IS
ABSOLUTELY UNPRECEDENTED.
THIS IS VISIONARY WORK THAT WAS
PUT TOGETHER BY CONSERVATION
INTERNATIONAL AND THE WILDLIFE
CONSERVATION SOCIETY AND THE
SMITHSONIAN.
AND SO TOGETHER THESE
ORGANIZATIONS HAVE PUT 60 TO 90
CAMERAS EACH IN 17 FORESTS ALL
AROUND THE WORLD.
AND THAT'S 15 DIFFERENT
COUNTRIES.
AND EACH OF THESE CAMERA SHOTS
AND EACH OF THESE SITES IS USING
THE SAME APPROACH.
SO WE HAVE THIS SYSTEMIC WAY TO
ANALYZE WHAT'S GOING ON IN THESE
FORESTS WORLDWIDE.
>> Reporter: YOU KNOW, LYDIA,
SOME OF THESE PHOTOS ARE PRETTY
INCREDIBLE.
I UNDERSTAND THAT SOME OF THESE
SPECIES WE RARELY SEE IN PERSON,
IS THAT RIGHT?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THESE ARE SOME OF THE MOST
ELUSIVE ANIMALS OUT THERE THAT
IF WE WERE HAVING PEOPLE WALK
THROUGH THE FOREST AND TRY TO
SURVEY WHAT'S THERE, VERY
UNLIKELY WOULD THEY SEE THESE
ANIMALS.
AND SO THAT'S WHY THESE CAMERAS
PROVIDE A REALLY SPECIAL GLIMPSE
INTO WHAT IS GOING ON IN THESE
FORESTS THAT IS HARD TO KNOW
OTHERWISE.
>> Reporter: WHAT ARE SOME OF
THOSE SPECIES YOU WERE ABLE TO
CAPTURE ON CAMERA.
>> WELL, ANY OF THE CHARISMATIC
LARGE CATS, FOR INSTANCE, LIKE
JAG WARS AND LEOPARDS THAT LIVE
IN THE FORESTS THAT ARE
INCREDIBLY ELUSIVE AND HARD
TO SIGHT.
WE HAVE SOME NICE SIGHTING OF
RARE BUSH DOGS IN SOUTH AMERICA
THAT ARE JUST-- IT'S HARD TO
KNOW IF THEY ARE IN A PROTECTED
AREA OR NOT.
SO THESE CAMERAS LET US KNOW
THAT THEY ARE THERE WHICH IS
GREAT NEWS.
>> Reporter: WHAT DOES IT TELL
US GENERALLY THOUGH ABOUT HOW
PROTECTED AREAS ARE MAYBE DOING
A GOOD JOB OF PROTECTING
WILDLIFE?
>> WELL, PROTECTED AREAS, EVEN
THOUGH THEY HAVE THEIR
WEAKNESSES, GENERALLY SUSTAIN
THE HABITAT THAT THESE ANIMALS
NEED.
AND SO WHEN YOU LOOK, FOR
EXAMPLE, ON GOGGLE EARTH, YOU
CAN OFTEN SEE A PROTECTED AREA
BECAUSE IT'S DIFFERENT FROM THE
LANDSCAPE AROUND IT WHERE A LOT
OF FORESTS HAVE BEEN CONVERTED
TO, FOR INSTANCE, AGRICULTURE OR
OTHER DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES.
SO HAVING THESE AREAS THAT
MAINTAIN THE HABITAT IS REALLY
IMPORTANT FOR WILDLIFE.
>> Reporter: IT TELLS US A LOT
ABOUT WHAT IS HAPPENING IN
PROTECTED AREAS BUT WHAT ABOUT
UNPROTECTED AREAS OF THE WORLD.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
SO WE'RE SEEING FROM THIS FIRST
ASSESSMENT THAT THESE PROTECTED
AREAS, AT LEAST FOR NOW, ARE
SHOWING GOOD NEWS.
BUT THAT'S NOT THE FINAL WORD.
IT'S JUST THE FIRST WORD FOR THE
TEAM NETWORK.
WHAT WE ALSO WANT TO DO IS
COMPARE TO OUTSIDE PROTECTED
AREAS.
WHERE WE WOULD ANTICIPATE THAT
STABILITY WOULDN'T BE THE CASE.
SO THERE ARE THREATS LIKE
CONVERSION OF FOREST AREAS TO
AGRICULTURE, THREATS FROM
ILLEGAL HUNTING, AND OTHER KINDS
OF HUMAN INFLUENCES THAT WE
WOULD EXPECT THAT THE WILDLIFE
OUTSIDE OF THE PROTECTED AREAS
IS PROBABLY NOT DOING AS WELL AS
THE ANIMALS INSIDE THE PROTECTED
AREAS.
>> Reporter: LYDIA BEAUDROLT
FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN,
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Thompson: THE AVERAGE
AMERICAN IS SAID TO EAT 27
POUNDS OF BANANAS EACH YEAR.
BUT AMERICA'S FAVORITE FRUIT
COULD BE IN TROUBLE.
THE INDUSTRY IS WORRIED ABOUT A
FAST-SPREADING FUNGUS THAT IS
THREATENING TO WIPE OUT THE
CAVENDISH BANANA, THE TYPE MOST
POPULAR IN THE UNITED STATES
IN 2014 THE U.N.'S FOOD AND
AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION CALLED
FOR A GLOBAL RESPONSE TO THE
GROWING THREAT, ESTIMATING IT
WOULD COST $47 MILLION TO STOP
THE DISEASE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MORI ROTHMAN
REPORTS FROM HONDURAS, ONE OF
THE TOP BANANA PRODUCING
COUNTRIES, TO SEE WHAT'S BEING
DONE TO PREVENT A BLIGHT OF THE
CROP THERE.
>> Reporter: IN NORTHERN
HONDURAS, OUTSIDE THE CITY OF
SAN PEDRO SULA, BANANA
RESEARCHER JUAN AGUILAR AND HIS
STAFF ARE HARD AT WORK TRYING TO
DEVELOP A NEW VARIETY OF BANANA,
ONE THAT'S RESISTANT TO THE
BANANA PLANT KILLING FUNGUS
"TROPICAL RACE FOUR," ALSO KNOWN
AS "PANAMA DISEASE."
>> FOR THIS DISEASE, DO NOT
EXIST ANY FUNGICIDE, NO
CHEMICAL.
>> Reporter: THE DISEASE IS
DECIMATING BANANA PLANTATIONS
AROUND THE WORLD.
FROM AUSTRALIA TO SOUTHEAST
ASIA, THE MIDDLE EAST, AND
AFRICA.
IN A STUDY PUBLISHED IN THE
JOURNAL "PLOS PATHOGENS,"
RESEARCHERS SAID: "CLEARLY, THE
CURRENT EXPANSION OF THE PANAMA
DISEASE EPIDEMIC IS PARTICULARLY
DESTRUCTIVE."
LUCKILY FOR THESE FARMERS, THE
DISEASE HAS NOT BEEN DETECTED IN
LATIN AMERICA, WHICH ACCOUNTS
FOR 70% OF THE WORLD'S BANANA
SUPPLY.
FARMERS HERE GROW THE CAVENDISH
BANANA, THE MOST WIDELY CONSUMED
BANANA IN THE UNITED STATES AND
AROUND THE WORLD.
AGUILAR, THE CHIEF BANANA
BREEDER AT THE HONDURAN
FOUNDATION FOR AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH, WORRIES THAT HONDURAN
FARM WORKERS WHO GO OVERSEAS TO
WORK COULD BRING THE FUNGUS BACK
EVEN THROUGH SOMETHING AS SIMPLE
AS THE DIRT ON THEIR SHOES.
>> Reporter: 60 YEARS AGO, A
SIMILAR FUNGUS WIPED OUT WHAT
WAS THEN THE MOST POPULAR BANANA
IN THE WORLD, THE GROS MICHEL,
KNOWN FOR ITS SWEET TASTE AND
CREAMY TEXTURE.
THE CAVENDISH ESSENTIALLY
REPLACED IT.
BUT FINDING A REPLACEMENT FOR
THE CAVENDISH THROUGH CROSS
BREEDING IS TOUGH BECAUSE MOST
CAVENDISH BANANAS ARE SEEDLESS.
GOOD FOR EATING, BAD FOR
BREEDING.
SO HOW MANY SEEDS WILL YOU GET
OUT OF THIS ENTIRE GROUP OF
BANANAS?
>> Reporter: TEN SEEDS FROM 100
BUNCHES?
>> Reporter:: HIS WORKERS
POLLINATE EACH BANANA PLANT BY
HAND, HARVEST THOUSANDS OF
BANANAS, AND LOOK TO FIND A RARE
SEED HERE AND THERE.
>> Reporter: THROUGH CROSS
BREEDING, AGUILAR COMBINES
BANANAS FAVORED BY FARMERS, LIKE
THE CAVENDISH, WITH PLANTS THAT
ARE RESISTANT TO PANAMA DISEASE.
AGUILAR CULTIVATES THOUSANDS OF
BANANAS IN SEARCH OF THE MOST
DISEASE RESISTANT ONE.
HE NUMBERS EACH NEW BANANA
PLANT, AND THEN SENDS HIS BEST
SAMPLES TO AUSTRALIA, ONE PLACE
WHERE THE DISEASE EXISTS.
THERE IT IS TESTED FOR
RESISTANCE TO THE FUNGUS.
AGUILAR IS IN A RACE NOT ONLY TO
FIND A RESISTANT VARIETY OF THE
CAVENDISH, BUT ALSO TO HELP
DEVELOP NEW VARIETIES JUST IN
CASE THE CAVENDISH CAN'T BE
SAVED.
>> Reporter: TELL ME A LITTLE
ABOUT WHAT YOU NEED TO MAKE THE
PERFECT BANANA, THE NEXT BANANA
THAT EVERYBODY WANTS TO BUY IN A
GROCERY STORE?
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE POSSIBLE
REPLACEMENTS IS THE SUCRIER
BANANA, A SMALLER SWEETER COUSIN
TO THE CAVENDISH.
AGUILAR GAVE ME A TASTE OF A
PANAMA DISEASE RESISTANT
PROTOTYPE HE CREATED.
>> Reporter: ONE PROBLEM: IT
TENDS TO BRUISE DURING SHIPMENT.
EVEN IF AGUILAR FINDS A PANAMA
DISEASE RESISTANT VERSION OF THE
CAVENDISH, HE WARNS THAT THE
DISEASE ITSELF CAN EVOLVE.
>> Reporter: SO YOU'RE ALWAYS IN
A RACE AGAINST THIS CHANGING
DISEASE.
>> Thompson: READ EIGHT THINGS
YOU DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT BANANAS AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Thompson: A POWERFUL
EARTHQUAKE ROCKED SOUTHERN
ALASKA EARLY TODAY.
THE EPICENTER OF THE 7.1
MAGNITUDE QUAKE WAS NEAR THE
COASTAL TOWN OF ANCHOR POINT IN
THE KENAI PENINSULA.
TWO SMALLER AFTERSHOCKS HIT OFF-
SHORE HOURS LATER.
TREMORS COULD BE FELT BY PEOPLE
IN ANCHORAGE ABOUT 160 MILES
AWAY.
OFFICIALS REPORTED SCATTERED
POWER OUTAGES AND ROAD DAMAGE,
BUT NO INJURIES.
U.N.-SPONSORED PEACE TALKS TO
END THE BLOODY CONFLICT IN SYRIA
ARE SET TO BEGIN TOMORROW IN
GENEVA.
BUT THE START COULD BE PUSHED
BACK BY A DISPUTE OVER WHO WILL
MAKE UP THE DELEGATION OF REBELS
FIGHTING PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD, AND BY OPPOSITION DEMANDS
THAT ASSAD-ALLY RUSSIA STOP AIR
ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS.
MORE THAN A QUARTER-MILLION
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED DURING
THE ALMOST FIVE-YEAR LONG WAR
AND MILLIONS MORE SYRIANS HAVE
FLED THE COUNTRY AS REFUGEES.
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT TROOPS GAINED
A BARGAINING CHIP TODAY BY
CAPTURING THE KEY REBEL-HELD
TOWN OF RABIAA.
IN EUROPE, DEMONSTRATORS
GATHERED ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
BORDER BETWEEN GREECE AND TURKEY
FOR A SECOND DAY TO DEMAND THAT
REFUGEES, MANY ESCAPING THE
VIOLENCE IN SYRIA, BE ALLOWED TO
CROSS FREELY BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES.
THIS EIGHT-MILE STRETCH OF LAND
CONNECTING THEM IS CURRENTLY
SEPARATED BY A FENCE MONITORED
BY POLICE, MILITARY PATROLS, AND
SECURITY CAMERAS.
THE PROTESTERS CLAIM THE FENCE
IS AN IMPEDIMENT TO ASYLUM-
SEEKERS, FORCING THEM TO MAKE A
MORE DANGEROUS CROSSING INTO
EUROPE BY SEA.
SO FAR THIS MONTH, AT LEAST 60
MIGRANTS HAVE DROWNED TRYING TO
REACH GREECE BY BOAT-- 46 OF
THEM JUST THIS FRIDAY.
OF THE MORE THAN 850,000 ASYLUM-
SEEKERS THAT ENTERED GREECE LAST
YEAR, ONLY 3,600 CROSSED OVER
THE LAND BORDER WITH TURKEY.
ELSEWHERE, AUSTRIA SAID A CAP ON
THE NUMBER OF REFUGEES IT
ACCEPTS THIS YEAR, JUST OVER
37,000, COULD BE REACHED IN A
MATTER OF MONTHS.
>> Thompson: AND FINALLY,
EIGHT MUSEUM WORKERS IN CAIRO
ARE FACING NEGLIGENCE CHARGES
FOR ALLEGEDLY DAMAGING THE 3300-
YEAR-OLD MASK OF KING TUT.
THE FAMOUS RELIC WAS DAMAGED IN
2014 WHEN THE MASK'S BEARD WAS
KNOCKED OFF AND THEN HASTILY
GLUED BACK ON.
EGYPTIAN PROSECUTORS CHARGED THE
EIGHT WORKERS INCLUDING THE THEN
HEAD OF THE EGYPTIAN MUSEUM FOR
TRYING TO COVER UP THE DAMAGE.
THE MASK WAS PUT BACK ON DISPLAY
LAST MONTH AFTER BEING REPAIRED
BY A TEAM OF SPECIALISTS.
AND THAT'S ALL TONIGHT FOR PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.